UDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.On the
"NewsHour" tonight: Following a
tense week, Iran vows to expand
its missile production, despite
possible new U.S. sanctions.
t's Friday. Mark Shields and
Michael Gerson review politics
in 2015 and look ahead to the
new year. nd in its last
season, we look at how the
British drama "Downton Abbey"
has captivated American
audiences.JULIAN FELLOWES,
Creator, "Downton Abbey": One of
the important things about drama
is to remind the viewer that
everyone is a hundred percent at
the center of their own life.
UDY WOODRUFF: All that and
more this New Year's night on
the "PBS NewsHour." BREAK)
UDY WOODRUFF: This New Year's
Day was marred by violence in
Israel after a gunman opened
fire on a popular bar in Tel
Aviv, killing two people before
fleeing the scene. At least
three others were wounded. The
city's mayor said it appeared to
be -- quote -- "a terrorist
attack motivated by
nationalism." A manhunt is under
way for the shooter, who has yet
to be officially identified.
ith extremist violence on the
rise in the Middle East, the
United Nations reported the
number of deaths in Iraq last
month rose to 980 people. That
is up from 888 in November. More
than half of those killed were
civilians.In Germany,
Bavaria's top security official
says there's no longer any
concrete indications of a
specific terror threat. Police
in Munich evacuated two train
stations on New Year's Eve,
after word that Islamic State
extremists planned to attack
them. Officials said the overall
terror threat in Europe remains
high, and security was still
tight today, with some 100 extra
officers deployed.Despite
security threats, people around
the world welcomed the start of
a new year today with fireworks,
celebrations, and well-wishes.
t the Vatican, Pope Francis
marked the Catholic Church's
World Day of Peace by urging
people to respect the
fundamental rights of all.POPE
FRANCIS, Leader of Catholic
Church (through translator):
Sometimes, we ask ourselves how
it is possible that human
injustice persists unabated, and
that the arrogance of the
powerful continues to demean the
weak, relegating them to the
most squalid outskirts of our
world. All of us are called to
immerse ourselves in this ocean,
to let ourselves be reborn, to
overcome this indifference which
blocks solidarity, and to leave
behind the false neutrality
which prevents sharing. UDY
WOODRUFF: Meanwhile, in his
annual New Year's speech, North
Korean leader Kim Jong-un called
for reunification talks with
South Korea, but he blamed Seoul
for mistrust between the two
nations.And in the U.S., the
127th Rose Parade rolled down
the streets of Pasadena,
California. Security was
tightened for the more than
700,000 spectators who turned
out for the event, but
authorities said there were no
known threats.Officials in
Dubai are investigating what
caused a massive New Year's Eve
fire at a high-rise luxury
hotel. It became engulfed in
flames two hours before
midnight, as crowds of revelers
gathered nearby. Smoke continued
to billow out of the 63-story
building today, as firefighters
worked to cool it down. There
were no fatalities, but 14
people were treated for minor
injuries. he world's most
polluted city slashed the number
of vehicles allowed on its
streets today. Authorities in
New Delhi, India, kicked off a
two-week test that alternates
the days private cars may be
driven based on whether their
license plates end in an odd or
even number. Authorities hope
the initiative will help combat
record levels of air pollution
in the capital. ack in this
country, weary Missouri
residents found some relief
today from the record-setting
floods that have swept across
much of the state. Major
interstates in the Saint Louis
area reopened to traffic as high
waters retreated. But, for other
communities downstream, the
worst is yet to come.
loodwaters began to recede
near many of the hardest-hit
Saint Louis suburbs, where the
surging Meramec River damaged
hundreds of homes. Meanwhile,
crews worked through the night
and into the morning,
desperately trying to restore
services in Missouri. They
reopened two major
transportation arteries,
Interstates 55 and 44, which had
been flooded for days. But
recovery efforts for those
forced to flee have only just
begun.Residents in the Saint
Louis suburb of Valley Park,
where the Meramec crested at a
record 44 feet, returned for the
first time today to survey the
damage. Meanwhile, farther
downstream, the threat of
additional flooding remained
high. llinois Governor Bruce
Rauner ordered the National
Guard to active duty and told
residents to brace for more
damage. OV. BRUCE RAUNER (R),
Illinois: I'm mostly concerned
about Alexander County at the
moment south here. It's going to
be 50 feet down there; it's
cresting right now. And we were
just told an hour ago that it's
breached the levee. The levee is
going to wash away. And we're --
we have been asking everybody in
Alexander County to evacuate.
UDY WOODRUFF: And officials
warn the high waters could
travel south to Arkansas and
Tennessee.Louisiana has also
declared a state of emergency in
anticipation of the flooding
that is to come. So far, the
floodwaters have been blamed for
at least 22 deaths. resident
Obama is exploring unilateral
steps he can take to address gun
violence. In his first weekly
radio address of 2016, he said
his staff has been looking into
potential executive actions. Mr.
Obama will meet Monday with
Attorney General Loretta Lynch
to explore options to keep guns
out of the hands of -- quote --
"an irresponsible, dangerous
few." ARACK OBAMA, President
of the United States: I get too
many letters from parents, and
teachers, and kids to sit around
and do nothing. The gun lobby is
loud and well-organized in its
defense of effortlessly
available guns for anyone. The
rest of us are going to have to
be just as passionate and
well-organized in our defense of
our kids. UDY WOODRUFF: The
president will reportedly take
action to set a -- quote --
"reasonable threshold" for when
sellers need to seek a
background check. he new year
also ushered in a host of new
laws; 14 states and several
cities raised the minimum wage.
California and Massachusetts
increased it to $10 an hour,
while Seattle's minimum hourly
wage rose to $13. New
legislation in Texas has made it
easier to openly carry guns. And
Hawaii became the first state in
the nation to raise the legal
smoking age from 18 to 21.We
also mark the passing of two
talented entertainers. Natalie
Cole, the daughter of jazz
legend Nat King Cole, died
overnight in Los Angeles
following a series of health
problems. The R&B singer first
made a name for herself with the
1975 breakout hit "This Will
Be," and went on to win nine
Grammy Awards. In 2010, Cole
performed the gospel song "I
Wish I Knew How It Would Feel to
Be Free" at the White House.
atalie Cole was 65 years old.
ctor Wayne Rogers also died
Thursday in Los Angeles, after
he developed pneumonia. Rogers
was best known as Army doctor
"Trapper" John McIntyre on the
"MASH" television series in the
1970s. He played the role for
the first three of the show's 11
seasons. Wayne Rogers was 82
years old.Still to come on the
"NewsHour": a tense week in
U.S./Iran relations; inside
Aleppo, living in a Syrian city
under siege; Mark Shields and
Michael Gerson review the year
in news and look ahead to 2016;
and much more.The prospects
for a thaw in relations between
the U.S. and Iran that some
thought possible after the
nuclear deal were again set back
this week, after several flash
points that showed the
fundamental disagreements that
remain. he landmark nuclear
accord signed in July between
Iran and six world powers led by
the United States is soon due to
be implemented fully. Just this
week, most of Iran's stockpiles
of low-enriched uranium were
removed from the country by
ship. ut there are renewed
tensions between Iran and the
U.S. that could affect the
nuclear accord. Recent ballistic
missile tests by Iran were said
by the United Nations to violate
prohibitions on missile testing.
The Obama administration then
drew up additional sanctions on
Iran's missile program. ut,
last night, The Wall Street
Journal reported the White House
had delayed those sanctions for
now. Iran's president, Hassan
Rouhani, said yesterday his
nation wouldn't only continue
its missile development, but
expand it.And just last
weekend, Iranian boats within
the very tight quarters of the
Straits of Hormuz, the gateway
to the Persian Gulf, fired a
rocket near the U.S. aircraft
carrier Harry Truman, a move the
U.S. called highly provocative.
The carrier and its battle
group, and a French naval
vessel, were sailing into the
Gulf to continue the bombardment
of the Islamic State in Iraq and
Syria.As we begin the new
year, where do things stand
between the U.S. and Iran?For
that we turn to Karim
Sadjadpour. He's senior
associate at the Carnegie
Endowment for International
Peace.Welcome back to the
program.KARIM SADJADPOUR,
Carnegie Endowment For
International Peace: Thank you,
Judy. UDY WOODRUFF: So, what
is going on with Iran? What's
behind these missile tests, what
appears to be provocative firing
very close to a U.S. ship?
ARIM SADJADPOUR: Judy, when we
describe Iran's political
factions, we commonly use the
term moderates and hard-liners.
erhaps a more appropriate term
would be to call them -- you
have the bridge-builders, people
like President Rouhani and
Foreign Minister Zarif, that
want to build bridges with the
West, with the United States,
and you have the saboteurs,
those who are very concerned
about the prospect of a more
integrated Iran.Within the
Revolutionary Guards, you have a
lot of saboteurs, people who
don't have much in terms of
their popular support, but they
have a lot in terms of coercive
power. And I think that the
missile tests, the imprisonment
of dual nationals are all meant
as a signal to the United States
that the nuclear deal is not
about a broader rapprochement,
the relations are going to
remain antagonistic, and to
Iran's own population to send
the signal, don't think the
nuclear compromise was a sign of
weakness. We remain strong and
in control. UDY WOODRUFF: Were
these tests, Karim, legal,
though, under the terms of the
nuclear deal? ARIM SADJADPOUR:
The missile tests weren't a
violation of the nuclear deal,
but they were a violation of
U.N. Security Council
resolutions.And I think this
is the dilemma that the Obama
administration is in. Now, on
one hand, the nuclear deal with
Iran could be the crowning
foreign policy achievement of
the Obama administration. They
don't want to pursue sanctions
if it is going to undermine the
nuclear deal. UDY WOODRUFF:
What role did the discussion in
Washington, in the White House,
the reporting that the White
House might be prepared to
propose sanctions in response,
what role does that play in all
of this?KARIM SADJADPOUR:
Well, I think people in Tehran
certainly probably recognize the
dilemma the Obama administration
has.They don't want to do
anything to sabotage the nuclear
deal. They don't want to do
anything which could potentially
weaken these bridge-builders I
was talking about in Tehran. At
the same time, they want to
react to Iran's provocations.
o, I think that, internally in
the White House, there is
probably debate between folks at
Treasury, at the Pentagon and
those who are at the White House
and State Department. UDY
WOODRUFF: And you see -- of
course, you had a number of
Republicans -- as soon as Iran
did this missile testing and the
other tests, there were comments
from Republicans saying, see, in
essence, we told you so, we
can't trust Iran. hat clearly
puts pressure on the White
House. And so how do the
Iranians read that? ARIM
SADJADPOUR: Well, I think, Judy,
there is not only going to be
pressure from Republicans, but
also many Democrats who
supported the Obama
administration. nd I think
that -- you know, what I always
tell people, that this nuclear
deal is going to take -- it has
to be judged over the course of
years, not months. It's not
going to bring about a
rapprochement between the United
States and Iran anytime soon.
nd we're going to have to --
it's a 10-year agreement. And
we're going to have to assess it
in the months to -- in years to
come, but it's going to be a
very perilous deal. And there's
many saboteurs in Washington and
Tehran. UDY WOODRUFF: Is it
possible it could become
derailed if this kind of
activity continues? ARIM
SADJADPOUR: Absolutely. think
that there are so many moving
parts to this deal. And then you
look at the places in the Middle
East in which the United States
and Iran are in potential zones
of conflict, whether that's
Syria, the Israeli-Palestinian
issue. So, there's lots of traps
here. UDY WOODRUFF: Yes, very
complex.Finally, Karim, a
number of -- there has been
reporting about a number of
Iranian-Americans imprisoned in
Iran. It's an additional
irritant in the relationship.
Does that play a role in all
this, or is that just side
activity as far as the Iranians
are concerned?KARIM
SADJADPOUR: Well, I don't think
it's affected the Obama
administration's position toward
Iran, but, certainly, it sours
the mood in the United States,
when, after this nuclear deal,
Iran goes and imprisons innocent
Iranian-Americans, including my
friend Siamak Namazi. think
it sends a signal to diaspora
Iranians around the world that,
don't think that Iran is welcome
and open to business to all of
you. This remains a close state
ruled by the Revolutionary
Guards and the supreme leader.
UDY WOODRUFF: And that is my
final question. Should Americans
understand that the hard-liners
are in charge in Iran or those
who seek to be bridge-builders?
ARIM SADJADPOUR: I think a
wonderful quote that captures
today's Middle East is from the
poem, a poem from Yeats, who
said, the best lack all
conviction and the worst are
full of passionate intensity.
nd I think, unfortunately,
within Iran, the hard-liners are
very much a minority, but they
continue to have a bulk of
political and coercive power.
UDY WOODRUFF: Well, it's, as
you said, complicated and one
that Americans are keeping a
close watch on. arim
Sadjadpour, we thank you. ARIM
SADJADPOUR: Thank you, Judy.
UDY WOODRUFF: This past year,
there has been a large focus on
the plight of refugees fleeing
the war in Syria. But what about
the people who have stayed in
that country? What are
conditions like for them?
effrey Brown has that.RAMI
JARRAH, Syrian Journalist: This
is the place of the attack
yesterday where the Russian
airstrike took place on Central
Aleppo. This is called the
Kalako (ph) area. EFFREY
BROWN: Footage captured by
Syrian journalist and activist
Rami Jarrah in Aleppo, Syria's
largest city, and one of the
world's most ancient urban
centers.RAMI JARRAH: A child
was caught here under the rubble
yesterday, and his father here
was screaming for the people to
get him out.JEFFREY BROWN:
Today, it's a scene of
destruction and despair, after
nearly five years of civil war.
AMI JARRAH: All the children
have now been taken away. There
are still children here. The
situation is tense at the
moment. EFFREY BROWN: Jarrah
has spent the last weeks in
Aleppo documenting the impact of
Russian bombing.Russia says
it's attacking terrorist groups,
including ISIS. Jarrah and
Syrian human rights groups say
civilians are being targeted and
killed, more than 2,000 of them
since Russian airstrikes began
in September. spoke with Rami
Jarrah by Skype and began by
asking him about those still
living in Aleppo, whether they
have water, electricity, food,
any semblance of normal life.
AMI JARRAH: In terms of the
sort of resources to live on,
electricity is locally
generated. So, people have
generators, and only those that
can afford them.So,
electricity is only available in
the evenings. It's a service
that has to be paid for through
those that provide those
generated electricity. And that
depends on diesel. The problem
with that is that that diesel
comes from ISIS-controlled
territory.And those routes
have been cut off due to the
attacks that are between ISIS
and these areas. So, those
routes are cut off. And it
basically means that the people
are cut off from any supplies of
diesel. lthough that is a good
thing, because it hold ISIS
back, but it means that the
civilians here facing the coming
winter also don't fuel to heat
themselves. So that's a setback.
In addition to that, water is an
extremely big problem. The
(INAUDIBLE) have cut off water
supplies and have -- a number of
towns actually used their
warplanes to destroy water
factories that are located in
Aleppo. nd one of the main
water factories was destroyed
about two months ago. So water
is actually being transported
from other areas to Aleppo, one
of which is Idlib and Latakia.
So, in terms of those resources,
it's actually a very -- the
civilians of Aleppo are facing a
lot of hardship.JEFFREY BROWN:
You have been out on the streets
regularly filing reports. And
there is a video we have seen
here in which you show the
aftermath of a bombing in
downtown Aleppo. I want to take
a look at that, show that to our
audience. AMI JARRAH: This is
the after-effects of a Russian
airstrikes on the Kalako (ph)
area of Aleppo. ow, the
Russians are supposed to be
targeting ISIS. SIRENS) AMI
JARRAH: The civil defense have
just arrived. CROSSTALK)RAMI
JARRAH: After these strikes, a
group of people that are
assigned with the task of
getting people out from under
the rubble. This is where it
landed. o, this man is
explaining that there's only
civilians living here.JEFFREY
BROWN: So, the Russians are
saying that they are targeting
ISIS and other -- and strategic
sites, but that's not what
you're seeing.RAMI JARRAH: No,
Jeffrey, that's definitely not
what I'm seeing, and it's
definitely not what the
civilians here in Aleppo are
seeing. think this man in the
video is a small example of what
is actually happening. He is
frantically trying to explain,
it's just civilians here.
There's no signs of ISIS here.
Why are they attacking us? We're
going to stay here. We're not
going to move, as much as you
attack us. Even if it's -- if
the last one of us has to die,
we're going to stay here. his
is what this man is saying. And
it's basically the language that
you're going to hear around
Aleppo, because the people here
are very much convinced that the
Russian and Syrian airstrikes
are meant and aimed to target
civilians and to drive them
either out of Aleppo or to kill
them. nd this is something
that they have come to believe
because of the constant attacks.
We're witnessing between 10 to
15 airstrikes in central Aleppo
alone on a daily basis. And
these airstrikes, what we have
been doing is trying to follow
these airstrikes. I have gotten
my hands on -- access to
information of when the strikes
hit. So, I'm following the civil
defense.I haven't, until now,
seen one attack that has landed
on a military unit or a depot.
And this is something that we're
trying to document and make
clear. Now, the problem is that
last year U.N. Security Council
resolution actually allowed
Russia to actually attack areas
that have ISIS or al-Nusra in
them. ut that's on the basis
that we're taking Russia's take
on where those groups are
located. But those groups are
not located in these areas. And
that's the excuse that is being
used to attack these areas. So,
this is a major problem. It's
who decides where these groups
are.We have been trying to
prove that these groups are not
located here. If they were, I
wouldn't be able to operate. I
wouldn't be able to do the
reports I was doing.JEFFREY
BROWN: So, what are the biggest
fears that you're hearing from
people now? Is it a government
victory backed by Russia? Is it
ISIS, especially, perhaps, as
it's driven more from Iraq,
coming in even stronger in and
around Aleppo?But what are the
fears that people are voicing?
AMI JARRAH: The people here
are not in any way worried that
Assad or Assad's army or Russia
or Hezbollah forces are going to
invade Aleppo.I haven't heard
this expressed once. The people
here are worried that ISIS is
going to, in fact, take over
Aleppo, because of the fact that
the -- not only the Russian
airstrikes, but in addition to
the coalition airstrikes, they
are actually forcing ISIS
further away from Iraq and
deeper into Syria.And what
that means is past Raqqa, past
Deir el-Zour, and into Aleppo.
So there are no signs of ISIS in
Aleppo. So, the fear here is
that ISIS takes these areas and
that there isn't really much
preventing that by Russia or the
Syrian regime, who are actually
more so accepting the idea of
Aleppo being taken by ISIS, as a
sort of an excuse that can be
used at a later stage to allow
the rest of the international
community also to intervene
against the opposition. EFFREY
BROWN: Let me just ask you
finally about your own work, the
dangers of it, the dangers for
anyone practicing journalism in
Syria today.RAMI JARRAH: The
dangers, I think they are the
same dangers that the people
here are witnessing.I don't
think there is an added danger
to the journalists. The fear
that I face here is not from the
rebel groups here. It's not from
bullets. It's from airstrikes.
And that is the only danger that
my life faces, is the
airstrikes. o, it's the same
danger that the rest of the
civilians here are facing. I
don't think there is an added
danger as a journalist. EFFREY
BROWN: All right, Rami Jarrah in
Aleppo, thank you so much.RAMI
JARRAH: Thank you. Thank you for
having me.JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay
with us.Coming up on the
"NewsHour": a National Book
Award winner described as both
hilarious and heartbreaking; and
the beginning of the end, the
final season of "Downton Abbey."
inally, 2016 is finally upon
us. And it's an election year.
nd we already have a little
news in the presidential race,
some eye-popping fund-raising
totals. Hillary Clinton's
campaign reports a new record
for a non-incumbent, raising $37
million for her primary bid in
the past three months alone.
Republican Ben Carson raised $23
million. And Ted Cruz has raised
about $20 million. He has not
released his official report
yet.To talk about the
election, to look ahead to what
is in store in 2016, we have the
analysis of Shields and Gerson.
That's syndicated columnist Mark
Shields and Washington Post
columnist Michael Gerson. David
Brooks is away. nd we welcome
you both. Happy new year.
ICHAEL GERSON: Happy new year.
ARK SHIELDS: Happy new year.
UDY WOODRUFF: 2016 is finally
here. o, Mark, a lot of money
being raised, but I want to turn
to something. We have spent a
lot of time this year talking
about Donald Trump. Let's talk
about some of the so-called
mainstream Republicans who are
trying to break through,
frankly, to knock him off of his
perch.Jeb Bush has been
trying. He's had a tough week.
They have redirected resources
and staff. Where -- do you see a
way forward for Jeb Bush? ARK
SHIELDS: Jeb Bush's only way
forward -- every four years,
Judy, everybody who runs for
president is an amateur at
running for president. It is so
unlike anything else, 50
different campaigns in 50
different states, all those
demands.But the iron rule of
politics prevails. And that is,
nobody has ever been elected
president of the United States
in the modern era who didn't win
the New Hampshire primary, at
the very worst finish second, as
George W. Bush did in 2000 to
John McCain, and as Barack Obama
did.But everybody else has
been a winner. And so, all of a
sudden, you realize all the
national headquarters I have,
national support doesn't mean
anything if I can't come out of
New Hampshire as one of the two,
or maybe at the very worst
third. And, right now, it looks
like, you know, Donald Trump has
the lead. So they're fighting.
eb Bush has directed all his
resources. It only took 97,000
votes to win New Hampshire in
2012. So, you say to yourself, I
have won Florida. John Kasich, I
have won Ohio. Chris Christie, I
have won New Jersey.And so,
all of a sudden, you're saying,
I can go in with effort, energy
and time. I can persuade enough
voters to my side, and I have to
do it if I'm going to survive.
UDY WOODRUFF: And so that is
what he has got to do.MARK
SHIELDS: That's right.JUDY
WOODRUFF: Michael, Iowa one
month away. We're exactly one
month away now from the Iowa
caucuses, and just a week later,
it's New Hampshire. What about
Jeb Bush? ICHAEL GERSON:
That's true. All of those
candidates you're talking about
take comfort in the fact that 70
percent, according to the
historical examples, of New
Hampshire voters make their
determination in the last 30
days of the race. It breaks
late. he problem for
Republicans here is that they
have four pretty strong
candidates in that establishment
or mainstream Republican space.
Donald Trump has the blue-collar
populists. Ted Cruz is really
solidifying religious voters,
some Tea Party voters.But this
mainstream lane has those four
candidates we have been talking
about, and all of them are good.
You watch C-SPAN and see Chris
Christie, who has been there 40
times. He's on his game. He's
doing really well.The Bush
campaign has gone through the
stages of grief, OK? They had a
message problem, and they had
performance problems. And
they're doing better. You're
watching them in town hall
meetings. His message is very
sharp. And he's making the most
principled criticism of Donald
Trump in this field and wants to
collect those voters. o it's a
real showdown between talented
candidates in this case.JUDY
WOODRUFF: Right.Does one or
another of them, Mark, have an
advantage in some way, as you
see it? ARK SHIELDS: I think
Christie is the best candidate.
He's the best natural candidate.
UDY WOODRUFF: As a campaigner.
ARK SHIELDS: As a campaigner,
he's the best.But what all of
them face, Judy, is -- at this
point is that they're starting
to get -- as they pop their head
up, whether it's Marco Rubio and
his absenteeism from the Senate,
or it's Chris Christie and it's
nine times the credit rating of
New Jersey has been lowered, or
if it's John Kasich, and the
Bush people are now -- or the
Bush PAC, at least, is raising
the fact that, in 1994, John
Kasich in the House, as a House
member, voted for the assault
weapons ban, and that this is
now a disqualification, with all
that has happened in this
country.But you start to see,
they realize that only one of
them probably can really survive
New Hampshire and Iowa. And so
the sniping at each other is
going on. I would say Bush is
just the anomaly. I mean, Bush
had the best record going in. He
was -- he had the best peer
review. He had a record as a
conservative in a reasonably
conservative party, a swing
state, a Latino wife. He spoke
Spanish.You know, on paper --
but he just hasn't connected,
basically. And he's now down to
he's got to win Peterborough,
he's got to win Keene.
CROSSTALK)MICHAEL GERSON:
Right. And he has the best
ground game of any of the
candidates. He's got money in
the bank. ou know, Chris
Christie, if he wins, he's
running a single-state campaign.
There are real questions of
whether he could follow that up
in the decisive races in March.
ARK SHIELDS: Yes. I agree. I
agree.MICHAEL GERSON: Someone
like Bush could do that, or
Rubio. They're building national
campaigns. They are capable of
doing that. So, they're
distinguishing themselves in
various ways. And the choice
will be fascinating.MARK
SHIELDS: I will just say that I
think Bush acknowledges that
he's not running a national
campaign now. He knows... UDY
WOODRUFF: By saying he's putting
staff and money...(CROSSTALK)
ARK SHIELDS: By putting all
the resources -- by taking the
television money out of Iowa.
He's basically saying, New
Hampshire is big casino for him.
think what it proves to me,
anyway, is that Chris Christie
would have been Barack Obama's
strongest opponent in 2012.
UDY WOODRUFF: Well, we will
see what... ARK SHIELDS: I
mean, he was really -- he's just
a gifted campaigner.JUDY
WOODRUFF: I want to ask you both
about somebody else on the
Republican side who's having --
who has had an even more
difficult time this week,
Michael, and that's Ben Carson.
e's now had five staffers, two
very senior people leave the
campaign. Where does he stand?
ICHAEL GERSON: Well, this is
the problem of campaigning as a
candidate with no experience.
You have no experience.
LAUGHTER) ICHAEL GERSON: I
mean, he has not run a good
campaign. It's imploding. He had
broad resignations on people,
because he had two power centers
in the campaign that were
obviously being played off
against one another.And all
this redounds to the benefit of
Ted Cruz, particularly in Iowa,
who is, I think, picking up a
lot of that ground that Carson
is conceding. UDY WOODRUFF:
And it's a reminder that money
may not make the difference. As
we just said, he raised $23
million in the last quarter.
ARK SHIELDS: But they spent a
lot of money to raise the money,
Judy. he key number in all of
those figures is cash on hand,
how much they have -- how much
they have spent to raise it. And
Ben Carson, it comes back, that
campaign has become a civil war
in a leper colony.(LAUGHTER)
ARK SHIELDS: He has basically
acknowledged all of it. UDY
WOODRUFF: Oops. ARK SHIELDS:
And the recriminations back and
forth.And the old saw,
bromide, whether it's or not, if
you can't run a campaign, how
can you run the country? And I
think that is coming to...
ICHAEL GERSON: Some truth to
it, yes.JUDY WOODRUFF: 2015,
ask both of you.Michael, I
will start with you. What were
the moments that are going to
make a difference, do you think,
as we look to this campaign
going forward?MICHAEL GERSON:
Well, the event is the obvious
one, which is, Donald Trump has
found a new way to run a
presidential campaign.I have
been part of three of them. You
put out policy papers. You give
speeches. You get endorsements.
You raise money. He has tweeted
his way to dominance in this new
media environment. It is a new
way to conduct a campaign, the
reality television version. I
think that it's many times
vulgar and shallow, but it has
an audience, and that's clearly
true. nd the moment, though,
that I think is the most
important is the leading
Republican candidate referring
to the Japanese internment, this
historical example, in December
as a positive example in the
context of the war on terror.
ARK SHIELDS: Yes. ICHAEL
GERSON: It is the -- for me,
personally, that was a really
terrible moment in modern
Republican history. And, you
know, I think it's going to have
consequences going forward.
UDY WOODRUFF: What about for
you, Mark, moments in 2015?
ARK SHIELDS: I would say the
Trump phenomenon. irst of all,
I have to say that Bernie
Sanders -- the idea that Bernie
Sanders could emerge to the
point where he is, with 2.5
million contributors, with, you
know, actually having changed
the terms of the debate for the
Democratic nomination, the
dialogue, I think, is a real
surprise. ut, to me, the Trump
-- the Trump model, where the
unscripted sort of off-the-cuff,
no teleprompter, speaking, and
making, Judy, what could at best
be called reckless statements,
at worst be called divisive, but
have to be called untruths,
whether it's, I saw thousands of
people in Jersey City on the day
of September 11 dancing in the
streets at the prospect or the
reality of the... UDY
WOODRUFF: Nine-eleven.MARK
SHIELDS: ... World Trade Center
falling.But each of them is
reckless in its own way. When he
said that 81 percent of whites
who are murdered in this country
are murdered by black Americans,
when, in fact, it's the
opposite, I mean, the reality is
that 80 -- 16 percent of whites
are killed by black Americans
and 82 percent of whites are
killed by whites. ut -- and
then, when called on this, he
pays no price. That's -- I guess
that's -- if it's our fault, if
it's the voters who are just fed
up, I don't know. UDY
WOODRUFF: Is that something,
though, that endures into this
next year? Do you see that
phenomenon of being able to say
what he wants to say and having
it stand lasting and having an
effect? ICHAEL GERSON: I think
it's raising a very fundamental
issue in American politics,
which is, what is the meaning of
authenticity? s it this kind
of, you know, offhand comment
that Donald Trump engages in, or
is it crafted rhetoric? Is it
careful policy? Is it
seriousness? And right now, we
have a model, a presidential
model of authenticity that means
thoughtlessness. And I think
that that's going to have to be
retaken in the Republican Party.
UDY WOODRUFF: You know,
Michael, you mentioned
immigration, or at least what --
part of what Trump said, but
what -- Mark, what issues do you
see shaping this next -- these
-- this next phase, the
election, and leading up to
November? ARK SHIELDS: Well, I
think there's two that really
work against the Democrats,
basically, a third White House
term. he first is the
revelation in surveys, in Wall
Street Journal/NBC poll in
particular, that 73 percent of
people want to change policies
from President Obama. So, every
election is either change or
continuity. We're going to
continue or we're going to go in
a different direction.
CROSSTALK)JUDY WOODRUFF: ...
50 percent, but 73 percent...
CROSSTALK)MARK SHIELDS:
Seventy-three percent want to
change the policies.That's
exactly the same number, Judy,
as it was in the summer of 2007,
when President Bush was in his
seventh year, which, remember,
2008 was very much of a change
year. And I would say the other
one is the Paris and San
Bernardino, when the emphasis
and the focus switched in
America, which hurt Ben Carson,
obviously, but switched to
terrorism and sort of a fear and
war on terror.And I think that
helps Republicans have -- who,
over the past generation, are
seen as better than the
Democrats on national security.
Whether they should be or not,
they are. UDY WOODRUFF: What
issues do you see?MICHAEL
GERSON: I will tell you one
hopeful issue for 2016. ith
the right lineup, with, say,
President Rubio and Speaker
Ryan, both of them have tried,
from the Republican side, to
engage the issue of poverty.
Paul Ryan has traveled the
country looking at examples of
community-based efforts. Rubio
has put out serious policy on
EITC and other things.I'm
hoping that, under certain
circumstances -- it would be
different from Cruz, for
example, or Trump -- but under
certain circumstances, you do
have the groundwork laid for a
debate about social mobility in
this country that I think could
be very productive and is
necessary.JUDY WOODRUFF: And
on that hopeful note, we will
end it and once again say happy
new year to you both, 2016.
ARK SHIELDS: OK. Happy new
year. ICHAEL GERSON: Happy new
year. UDY WOODRUFF: Michael
Gerson, Mark Shields, thank you.
ARK SHIELDS: Judy Woodruff,
happy new year. LAUGHTER)
UDY WOODRUFF: Thank you.Now
another in our conversations
with winners of the 2015
National Book Awards. dam
Johnson, a professor of creative
writing at Stanford and a 2012
Pulitzer winner, won the fiction
category for his collection of
stories, "Fortune Smiles."
effrey Brown talked with him
recently at the Miami Book Fair,
starting with a question about
the appeal of writing short
stories.ADAM JOHNSON, National
Book Award Winner: I love the
short story.Having written two
novels in a row, I missed the
power of the short story. To me,
a short story is like a battery
that can store emotion and just
charge you up directly with it,
and it can hold emotion for as
long as you want and then
transmit it.I have always
loved research. I have always
loved going out into the world
and finding a twin for what's
going on inside me. Maybe
technology's part of that.
EFFREY BROWN: So, what starts
a story for you?ADAM JOHNSON:
I have learned over the years to
trust my obsessions.JEFFREY
BROWN: Obsessions.ADAM
JOHNSON: When I get obsessed
about Nirvana songs, listening
to them over and over, or buying
mauri dade (ph) over the
Internet late at night and
running up my eBay bill, it
usually means it's connected to
something inside. And I won't
know what it is until I put that
obsession into a story. EFFREY
BROWN: Mm-hmm. And does it come
quickly once you start? DAM
JOHNSON: These stories came very
quickly.You know, when you're
writing a novel, and it takes
years, there are all these
beautiful tempting stories that
come along and they say, write
me. Oh, no, quit your novel.
That's hard work. It might fail.
Come write me. I'm alluring.
And...(LAUGHTER)ADAM
JOHNSON: But you have got to say
no to those.JEFFREY BROWN: You
have a personal relationship
with these stories, huh?ADAM
JOHNSON: That's the devil
talking, because you must
complete your novel and the long
journey.And when I was done, I
couldn't wait to go write some
stories.JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
And once you start, is there a
lot of chiseling that goes into
them? How crafted are -- no.
DAM JOHNSON: I would say,
rather than drafting, it's more
about discovering.I write
scene by scene, and I think, I
want to get my character to this
point. I want to get my
characters to the bedroom. I
want to get my characters toward
the appearance of the first
hologram. And then I just -- I
have to really ponder and think
about what is going to happen
next. think contemporary
fiction is very closely related
to improvisational jazz. The
jazz musician has a tradition,
has a talent, has some concerns.
It's in conversation. But he or
she doesn't know what the song
is going to be. It appears
before them.JEFFREY BROWN: The
first story, called "Nirvana,"
involves holograms, involves new
technology. There, you had to do
a different kind of research, I
assume. DAM JOHNSON: Well,
just -- I just had to look
around me.JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
DAM JOHNSON: I live in San
Francisco, and I work in Silicon
Valley and there are
self-driving cars. And on
Stanford campus, there will be
flying solar-powered autonomous
things zipping around, or things
that balance on one wheels that
students are making.JEFFREY
BROWN: And yet we're still
human, right, which is part of
what comes through in the story.
DAM JOHNSON: That's exactly
it. And what is it going to mean
to have holograms in our lives?
ou know, Josephine Baker is
going on tour next year.
EFFREY BROWN: Yes, you're
talking -- the great singer
FMDNMOlong dead, but is going on
tour through a hologram.ADAM
JOHNSON: Long dead. That's
right.(CROSSTALK) EFFREY
BROWN: And that triggers
something for you.ADAM
JOHNSON: People are going to
fill auditoriums, because the
tickets have already sold out
for the premiere performances,
because they love her.And it
doesn't matter. As long as the
human voice is there, I think it
doesn't matter that it -- she's
just made of light. EFFREY
BROWN: But that's weird, right?
I mean, it's strange. DAM
JOHNSON: Well...JEFFREY BROWN:
She's made of light, and people
are going to see a dead -- long
dead singer perform. That sounds
like an Adam Johnson story,
actually. CROSSTALK)ADAM
JOHNSON: Do we not look at a
television and respond
profoundly to cinema and to good
TV? And those people are made of
light.JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
hen you and I talked after you
wrote "The Orphan Master's Son"
set in North Korea, you said --
I just went back to look at that
interview. You said to me, when
I asked you, why North Korea,
"It seemed, as a writer, that
this was perhaps the most
difficult place on earth to be
fully human." hat goes just to
what we are talking about,
right, this idea of being fully
human, even amid technological
change, natural disasters,
torture.ADAM JOHNSON: That's
right. Right. s the state of
being human eternal, as we think
of it throughout the history of
our evolution, or is it mutable?
You know, I'm not really sure.
As a fiction writer, the thing
I'm scared of the most is phones
in stories. What does it do to
tension, inertia, momentum,
information management if one
character at any moment can
share anything at a distance
privately with another
character?What does it do to
brooding, building, withholding,
with human confrontation,
conflict, with revelation, if
that's all subverted through
technology? EFFREY BROWN: All
right, the National Book Award
Winner for Fiction, Adam Johnson
for his book "Fortune Smiles."
ongratulations, and thanks.
DAM JOHNSON: Well, thank you.
UDY WOODRUFF: On Sunday, PBS'
Masterpiece Television series
"Downton Abbey" returns for its
final season. oday, in
Pasadena, California, PBS
sponsored Downton Abbey: The
Final Adventure, a float in the
127th annual Rose Bowl Parade.
AN: Just look at the detail of
the door. If you have to get
into the Abbey, sesame seed,
walnut shell, millet. The silver
there is lettuce, onion seed.
OMAN: It's really a
spectacular reproduction to
scale. We were blown away when
we saw this in person.JUDY
WOODRUFF: "Downton Abbey" comes
to the Rose Parade. ell,
meantime, back in August, I
visited the "Downton" set just
outside of London, and I met
some of the actors during one of
their last days of filming.
ere now, an encore of that
report. he music is instantly
recognizable, as is the tail --
that's Isis, the dog -- both
part of theater opening credits
to the blockbuster British
television drama, "Downton
Abbey." For the past five years,
the Crawley family and their
servants have entertained us,
and in January, the drama begins
its sixth and final season on
PBS.The last chance for a few
more one-liners from the dowager
countess of Grantham, played
exquisitely by Dame Maggie
Smith.And surely, one final
calamity to beset lady's maid
Anna and her butler husband
Bates.The mastermind of this
runaway success is Sir Julian
Fellowes; also an actor, film
director, and, in his spare
time, a conservative member of
Britain's House of Lords. o,
"Downton Abbey" coming to an
end, is this -- are you saying
goodbye to a dear friend? Or is
it just -- have you already
moved on? ULIAN FELLOWES,
Creator: No, I wouldn't say I
have moved on. I mean, Downton
has been an extraordinary
milestone. You've spent a lot of
time in this industry, working
very hard on things that don't
do terribly well, the public
doesn't get them or whatever,
and then you suddenly ring the
bell. It's been fantastic.JUDY
WOODRUFF: Fantastic beyond
belief, becoming the top-rated
PBS drama of all time.
lobally, Downton airs in over
220 countries with a worldwide
audience of 120 million people.
ULIAN FELLOWES: I never think
it's a good idea to outstay your
welcome. And it seems right to
leave, so, I don't think we're
doing the wrong thing, but it's
been a happy time.JUDY
WOODRUFF: A happy time with
roots in a book by American
historian Carol Wallace, author
of To Marry an English Lord, Sir
Julian's inspiration for the
series. AROL WALLACE, Author,
"To Marry an English Lord": When
he had been asked by the
producers to write a series
about English aristocrats, he
had been reading To Marry an
English Lord. And he said he
thought it was all very well for
these heiresses to marry, but
then what happened to them 20
years later when they were -- I
think he put it -- freezing in a
house in Cheshire, aching for
Long Island? And that, of
course, Cora Grantham's dilemma,
there she is right there. UDY
WOODRUFF: Wallace's book tells
the true stories of young
American heiresses who left the
U.S. in the late 1800s to shop
for husbands in England. Their
money attracted down at the
heels aristocrats who had titles
and little else.What would he
have seen in these stories, in
this history? AROL WALLACE: I
think what Julian saw, the
source of the drama is exactly
the asymmetry of expectation --
what these American girls
thought marriage was going to be
and what it turned out to be,
and how their American
expectations kind of, trailed
along with them and formed their
relationships and their ideas of
marriage as they would 2030
years later.JUDY WOODRUFF: The
American girl of "Downton
Abbey," Cora Crawley, countess
of Grantham, is played by
Elizabeth McGovern. LIZABETH
MCGOVERN, Actor: I am shocked at
how sad I do feel to say goodbye
to people and houses and the
family. It's been a definite
life-changing kind of time for
all of us.JUDY WOODRUFF: In
what way? LIZABETH MCGOVERN:
Well, we've all been through
something that just felt it's
had a big impact on our personal
lives and we have been in it
together. UDY WOODRUFF: The
drama began in 1912, the day
after the sinking of the
Titanic, and has proceeded
through World War I, the Spanish
flu and the jazz age. Season six
is set in 1925 and opens to find
many formerly rich families
abandoning the life Downton
epitomizes, unable to afford the
expanse. Like the character she
plays, McGovern is married to an
Englishman and lives in the U.
K.How is it different from
other television series?
LIZABETH MCGOVERN: Well, the
one extraordinary difference is
that every word is written by
one man. I don't know of any
other television show that works
that way. And I, to this day,
find it absolutely mindboggling.
UDY WOODRUFF: Julian Fellowes
did not intend on being the sole
writer. ULIAN FELLOWES: I was
actually thrilled to get other
people to do it, but, for some
reason which I can't really
explain, the series seem to have
quite a distinctive voice. And
we did try, at the beginning, to
see if we could get other people
to replicate that voice. And we
tried with very good people. But
it seemed that if we wanted to
sustain this particular voice,
it had to be me.REBECCA EATON,
Masterpiece: It's coming from
his heart, his experience, his
passion.JUDY WOODRUFF: PBS'
Masterpiece presents "Downton
Abbey" in the United States, and
Rebecca Eaton is the program's
executive producer. EBECCA
EATON: There's a lot of heart in
it. There's a lot of generosity.
These are characters who are
taking care of each other. And
that is a lot of who Julian is.
ULIAN FELLOWES: We dealt with
all the characters very evenly.
e didn't say, The family are
the important characters and the
servants are the comic relief,
or servants are gallant on
suffering but the family is
horrible, all of which would
have been a treatment in an
earlier period. UDY WOODRUFF:
You give equal time to everyone,
so, in a way you're looking at
that age old struggle that we
are dealing with today in 2015
about inequality, discrimination
and the rest of it. And you
bring your own set of views to
that. ULIAN FELLOWES: It's
this business of entitlement,
that a child of the middle or
upper caste is brought up to
believe that certain things are
sort of their right, that this
is the way they will live.
Whereas other people are brought
up to feel like outsiders -- oh,
you're overreaching, so that's
not for the likes of us, and all
this stuff still goes on. t
does interests me. It shocks me
and it drives me mad when people
try to pretend it doesn't exist,
because, of course, it doesn't
exist for them. There are
millions of people who are being
cheated of their proper destiny
because it does still exist.
UDY WOODRUFF: Do you think
Downton contributes to the
conversation, to the discussion
of that?JULIAN FELLOWES: I
hope it contributes. I mean, I
think in our society,
particularly for the me-me-me
generation, there is a kind of
underlined solipsism in so many
of us that the only life that's
really happening is our own. And
everyone else's life is sort of
dependent on our life.One of
the important things about drama
is to remind the viewer that
everyone is 100 percent at the
center of their own life. That
there is no life being lived
under that roof that is more or
less important; that Mary or
Daisy, what happens to them is
just as important. And that's
why we have equal dramatic
weight for all the stories, to
show that.JUDY WOODRUFF: What
do you think will give people
great joy and excitement and
surprise, in a good way? And
what do you think will leave
people sad or devastated or
disappointed? ULIAN FELLOWES:
I adore these questions because
they're always asked in such
optimism, as if there is any
chance that I will answer. I
mean, of course, there are some
things in the season that will
make people sad and there are
other things that will make them
happy. And Maggie will say some
things that I hope will make
them laugh. UDY WOODRUFF: What
should fans expect, the audience
expect? LIZABETH MCGOVERN: I
would say that the audience will
feel satisfied that they've had
a chance to say goodbye to every
character in a gratifying way. I
think they'll feel full and not
shortchanged. ULIAN FELLOWES:
It's enough for me that people
enjoyed it, and they had a thing
on Sunday night and they would
say to each other, hurry up,
Downton is starting in five
minutes or whatever. I love
that. nd I think that if we
all manage to produce a show
that families could watch
together and argue over the
water cooler in the office the
next day, that's enough of an
achievement for me. I don't need
to feel that the world will
never be the same again after
Downton, because it will. UDY
WOODRUFF: And beginning the
first Sunday in January, fans
can lose themselves in the lives
of the people they have come to
know as friends.And the
"NewsHour" caught up with
additional actors from the
series. They talk about the
characters they play and the
experience working on "Downton
Abbey." That's to be seen Sunday
on "NewsHour Weekend."On the
"NewsHour" online right now:
Meet one Syrian refugee family,
starting life anew in
Pennsylvania's Amish country.
Read about their challenges, as
well as the support they have
received since they arrived. All
that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour. n "PBS
NewsHour Weekend" Saturday:
Millions of Americans live in
manufactured homes -- why are
some of them facing financial
obstacles.Here's an excerpt
from that report. ARRATOR: In
2006, Carla Burr was looking for
a new home. She bought this
three-bedroom manufactured home
for $113,000. Now 61 years old,
Burr and her home may need to
move. hile she owns the home
-- she made the purchase in cash
-- she doesn't own the land
underneath. Every month, Burr
pays rent to a property manager.
Over the past 10 years, that lot
rent has gone up 30 percent,
from $740 a month to $1,022 a
month.CARLA BURR, Homeowner: I
had no clue that the rent was
going to go up the way it did. I
mean, it's to the point now
where it's more than half my
Social Security.JUDY WOODRUFF:
That's tomorrow night on "PBS
NewsHour Weekend."And we will
be back right here on Monday
with a look at the federal
government's decision not to
fund in vitro treatments for
veterans who want to have a
baby. hat is the "NewsHour"
for tonight. I'm Judy Woodruff.
ave a great weekend. Good
night, and happy new year.